Bus Stop
Balancing

A Campaign Guide
for Agency Staff
TransitCenter works to improve public transit in ways that make
cities more just, environmentally sustainable, and economically
vibrant. We believe that fresh thinking can change the transportation
landscape and improve the overall livability of cities. We commission
and conduct research, convene events, and produce publications
that inform and improve public transit and urban transportation.
For more information, please visit www.transitcenter.org.

Publication Date: June 2019

1 Whitehall Street, 17th Floor,
New York, NY 10004
www.TransitCenter.org

   @transitcenter
   Facebook.com/transitctr
Bus Stop
Balancing:

A Campaign Guide
for Agency Staff
Acknowledgments

Philip Miatkowski and Kirk Hovenkotter of TransitCenter are
the authors of this report. Ben Fried, Steven Higashide, Stephanie
Lotshaw, and Hayley Richardson of TransitCenter provided
editorial review.

The authors are grateful for thoughtful interviews from James Boyle
of Sacramento RT, Matt Miller of Gold Coast Transit, Sean Kennedy
of SFMTA, Brandy Jones and Dave Etienne of Cincinnati Metro,
Shaun Tooley, formerly of DART, Greg Harris of RIPTA, Jeff Becker
of RTD, and Pierce Canser, Graydon Newman, Kate Elliott, and
Jack Wisner of King County Metro. The authors also thank Jonathan
Hawkins and James Boyle for providing feedback on earlier drafts.
Contents

Introduction                     04

Why a Campaign?                  05

What Are the Ingredients of a

Bus Stop Balancing Campaign?     06

Action Steps for a Bus Stop

Balancing Campaign               08

1. Prepare                       09

2. Implement and Communicate     13

3. Follow Up                     19

Conclusion: Give Riders Service

That's Too Good to Pass Up       21

Further Reading                  22
Bus stop balancing saves riders time,  Introduction
but it can be a tough sell.
                                       America's bus stops are too close together. In many cities, it's not
Bus stop                               uncommon to see bus stops every other block -- or even closer.
balancing is                           Given that buses spend 20% of their time at stops, reducing the
one of the most                        overall number of stops can dramatically speed trips for riders.
effective ways
for transit                                TransitCenter surveys consistently find that what transit riders
agencies to                            value above all is getting from A to B as quickly as possible. One of
speed up buses                         the simplest and most cost-effective ways to improve trip time is
                                       by extending the average distance between bus stops -- otherwise
                                       known as bus stop balancing, consolidation, or optimization.

                                           In San Francisco, SFMTA increased bus speeds 4.4% ­ 14%
                                       on routes by shifting stop spacing from nearly 6 stops per mile
                                       to 2.5 stops per mile. In Portland, Oregon, travel times improved
                                       5.7% when TriMet increased stop spacing by an average of 90 feet
                                       along one of its busiest routes, according to researchers at McGill
                                       University. Bus stop balancing was cited as the "most successful
                                       action taken" to improve bus speeds by agencies surveyed in TCRP
                                       Synthesis 110, Commonsense Approaches to Improving Transit
                                       Bus Speeds.1

                                           Riders sense that bad bus stop spacing slows them down. At
                                       a series of public workshops conducted by New York City Transit,
                                       63% of Bronx bus riders said they would prefer fewer stops.

                                           But bus stop balancing isn't without friction. Transit riders often
                                       feel ownership over their bus stops. Asking people to walk farther
                                       to something that used to be at their doorstep can be a tough sell.
                                       Making transit faster for more people involves trade-offs, and
                                       agency officials need to be prepared for some objections.

                                           To minimize and overcome pushback, transit agencies across
                                       the country have found success by approaching bus stop balancing
                                       with a comprehensive campaign strategy.

                                       1. Boyle, Daniel K. "TCRP Report 110: Commonsense Approaches for Improving Transit
                                       Bus Speeds." (Transportation Research Board, Washington, D.C., 2016), www.trb.org/
                                       Publications/Blurbs/170433.aspx

                                       4
Why a Campaign?

A campaign is a purposeful, organized, multi-pronged initiative to
create change within a fixed timeline. For transit agencies, adopting
a campaign strategy for bus stop balancing entails coordinating
across departments, securing sufficient resources to do the job well,
crafting a winning message, and engaging directly with riders.

    Using a campaign strategy, agencies like Cincinnati Metro and
Gold Coast Transit in Ventura, California, successfully consolidated
stops and sped up trips for thousands of riders with minimal
complaints or opposition. Agency leadership committed the staff
time and funding to position the bus stop balancing initiatives
for success.

    In contrast, when bus stop balancing is housed solely within a
transit agency's planning division -- as is often the case -- the effort
tends to fall short. Without the explicit backing of agency executives
and political leadership, and lacking the capacity to communicate
effectively to riders or to government partners, a self-contained
process will fail.

    A bus stop balancing initiative in Albuquerque, New Mexico,
for example, did not engage elected leaders or the agency's
communications team. Misinformation started swirling, and
the effort was put on hold (see below).

    This brief shares examples of how a campaign approach to bus
stop balancing can overcome the challenges inherent to the task.
Through successful bus stop balancing campaigns, agencies can
provide quicker, more reliable trips for riders, more amenities
at stops, and more comfortable walks to transit.

What Happens Without a Campaign:
Lessons From ABQ Ride

In 2009, Albuquerque's ABQ RIDE learned the hard          signs also offered no opportunity for rider input and
way why communicating with elected officials and          conveyed nothing about improvements in service
testing messages with bus riders is so important. In its  or added amenities for the remaining stops. To
roll-out of bus stop consolidation, ABQ RIDE posted       complicate matters, the signs were posted in the heat
signs at bus stops that confused and panicked riders.     of mayoral campaign season. Bus stop removal became
The language was not clear and led many riders to         one of the top election issues. In response, the mayor
believe that every stop was slated for removal. The       put the bus stop balancing effort on hold.
For its Bronx bus network redesign, the                  What Are the Ingredients of a
New York MTA showed riders a diagram                     Bus Stop Balancing Campaign?
of the tradeoffs involved in bus stop
balancing. Nearly two-thirds preferred                   Bus stop balancing flexes almost every muscle in a transit
fewer stops.                                             agency. Planners need to identify the stops to remove that will
                                                         speed up buses the most, while ensuring that riders can safely
                                                         and comfortably walk to access service. Agency leaders need
                                                         to explain to riders why balancing bus stops will make trips
                                                         faster. Communications staff must alert riders to revised bus
                                                         stop locations. And after bus stops are changed, operators need
                                                         to know the new pattern.

                                                             In a successful bus stop balancing campaign, all of these
                                                         actors coordinate to deliver tangibly faster service to riders.

                                                             This brief goes into further detail on these campaign steps,
                                                         divided into three sections: preparation, implementation and
                                                         communication, and following up.

The Basics of Bus Stop Balancing

Points of                                Intersecting    Highly            Stops with low      Stops with
                                                                           utilization spaced  accessibility
Interest                                 Bus Routes      Utilized Stops    one block apart     and pedestrian
Hospitals                                Maintaining     Particularly                          safety issues
Schools                                  the ability to  those serving
Shopping Centers                         transfer        high proportions
Senior Center                                            of seniors and
and so on...                                             persons with
                                                         disabilities

                                                         6
The campaign should follow a sequence along these lines:

Assign leadership to an individual            Involve allies and partners like city
responsible for the overall campaign.         Departments of Transportation early
                                              on in planning.
Identify clear roles to everyone
on the campaign team.                         Identify target audiences, such as riders
                                              whose trips will be longer or shorter, and
Dedicate sufficient staff hours and funding   test out messages with them about how
for outreach, communications, and physical    their trips will change.
improvements at bus stops.
                                              Define a clear strategy to deal with
Develop a timetable with specific milestones  opposition, including when and how
to which team members can be held             to accommodate it.
accountable.
                                              Develop mechanisms to receive
Compile data on ridership, wheelchair         and respond to feedback.
ramp usage, and amenities for each bus
stop to inform the team's decision making.    Establish criteria for evaluating service
                                              after changes are implemented, including
                                              criteria for restoring stops, if absolutely
                                              necessary.

7
Action Steps
for a Bus Stop
Balancing
Campaign
1. Prepare

Get commitments of staff time from multiple
departments to enact your campaign

Bus stop removal campaigns draw on different functions within an
agency, including planning, operations, and communications. Staff
time and resources from these departments must be secured before
the campaign begins.

Survey riders to build the case
for bus stop balancing

Successful campaigns point to demands from riders to speed up bus
service. Conduct on-board surveys or use existing surveys of riders
to make the case for improving bus speeds and reliability.

Conduct an inventory of accessibility
and amenities at bus stops

Identify which bus stops in the system are ADA accessible and which
are not, and catalogue amenities like benches and shelters at each
stop. Low-ridership stops that are not accessible and lack amenities
should be prime candidates for removal.

      9
Cincinnati Metro Did Its Homework on Bus Stops

Cincinnati Metro launched a five-route bus stop     and community centers and catalogued amenities,
balancing pilot, called FAStops, that proposed      assessing accessibility for people with disabilities
removing 158 of the 698 stops (23%) along           and the availability of seating, lighting, and a shelter.
those routes.                                       Stops that scored low on the evaluation were more
                                                    likely to be removed. To preserve this information for
  To prepare for the bus stop balancing campaign,   future reference, Metro took photographs of every
Cincinnati Metro evaluated all 4,000 of its stops.  bus stop and stored them in a new database.
For each stop, Metro measured proximity to schools

Get bus operators involved early

Bus operators know more about the stops on their routes than anyone
else. They can help identify the stops to remove and the ones to
preserve, because they know which stops are important for people
with disabilities, or which serve major constituencies nearby.
They are also absolutely integral to informing riders about bus stop
balancing. Bus riders will likely find out about the removal of a
stop from a bus operator.

10
   Be ambitious about the number of stops to
   remove, assuming that electeds and board
   members will want to put back stops

   Agencies should begin by thinking expansively about bus stop
   removal, knowing that political pressures will probably result in
   some degree of scaling back. When riders complain about bus stop
   elimination, elected officials and board members may want to
   put some bus stops back in response. For this reason, it's important
   not to "pre-compromise" with a weaker plan designed to appease
   people instead of speeding up service. Prepare to come out of
   the gate with a very ambitious plan.

!  Alert elected officials, board members,

   and advocates early on

   There's no way around it: Riders are going to complain to elected
   officials and board members about bus stop removals. Agency staff
   need to inform public officials ahead of time, make them aware
   of the benefits of bus stop balancing, and prepare them for riders'
   reactions. Give advocates a heads up and tell them specifically how
   they can support the campaign.

Dallas Consulted Its In-House Experts:
Bus Operators

In 2013, Dallas Area Rapid Transit (DART) re-      stops to keep and which to remove. Bus depot
launched its bus stop balancing program, focusing  managers chose 15 operators to attend two workshops
on three routes. The agency removed 89 of 560      where they discussed major origins and destinations,
stops (16%), which increased the average distance  pedestrian safety issues, important stops for mobility-
between stops from 718 feet to 869 feet.           impaired riders, and bus stop locations that created
                                                   difficulties for operators maneuvering in traffic.
  DART recognized that bus operators had first-    The staffer leading the bus stop balancing initiative
hand knowledge of which bus stops served riders    also rode bus routes with the operators to see the
who would have trouble with longer walks. So       issues first-hand.
agency staff asked operators to weigh in on which
$  Commit to funding better amenities

   at bus stops that aren't removed

   By combining bus stop balancing with investments in
   sidewalks, crosswalks, shelters, benches, and real-time
   arrival information, agencies can counter objections to
   the removal of some stops and give the campaign better
   odds of political success. Conversely, campaigns that
   don't improve remaining bus stops will have a difficult
   time winning public support.

Agencies will have better luck
explaining stop removal decisions
to the public if those decisions are
based on clear criteria

Gold Coast Transit's Political Savvy

In early 2018, Gold Coast Transit District removed      stop consolidation at the board meeting and the
7 of 28 bus stops along a route in Ventura, CA.         public outreach event, and was swayed by Gold Coast
                                                        Transit's explanation of the benefits for bus riders.
  Prior to implementation, Gold Coast Transit           The agency credits this targeted communication
presented the project to its board of directors and at  with an elected official for bringing the whole board
a public workshop. One board member, a Ventura          of directors along on the bus stop balancing project.
City Council member, was especially crucial to win
over. The council member learned about the bus
2. Implement and
Communicate

Identify stops to remove
based on clear criteria

Riders and elected officials are going to ask why some bus stops
will be removed while others will remain. Agencies can provide good
answers if they base their decisions on clear criteria. Smart bus stop
balancing typically preserves stops that are key transfer points, stops
with high ridership, and stops close to senior centers and other major
destinations for older residents. The pedestrian environment should
also factor into the plan, with longer stop spacing in areas with
better walking conditions than those with inadequate sidewalks and
dangerous street crossings. Stop spacing may also vary by the type
of service, with greater distances between stops on routes designed
to provide faster service.
Test your communications
with a focus group of riders

Agencies that struggled with bus stop balancing found that riders
didn't understand the signs that staff posted on stops and were
unsure if their stop would be removed. Testing communications
beforehand with a sample of riders will reduce misunderstandings.

Create an online communications plan

Agencies should provide specific destinations online where riders
can learn about the bus stop balancing plan and submit feedback. The
online communications plan should at minimum include a website
that makes the case for bus stop balancing, as well as an email address,
hashtag, or phone number where riders can direct comments.

Cincinnati Metro To Riders:
We Heard You, Here's Our Plan

Cincinnati Metro created a website to highlight the    meetings, a map of which routes and stops may be
benefits of bus stop balancing, provide specific       affected, and a timeline for the project. The site
information about the agency's plan, and allow riders  emphasizes that the project is a pilot and that the
to be heard. The site illustrates bus stop balancing   agency will use feedback submitted by riders through
with graphics, videos, and an FAQ section. It also     an online survey.
conveys the time and location of community

Own what you're doing and communicate
to riders honestly

Don't use planner-speak. Be upfront with the public and elected
leaders about the bus stop balancing program. Communicate that
removing stops will improve overall trips times, but don't disguise
the fact that it will result in longer walks for some riders.

14
15
SFMTA Communicated With
Riders In Person At Stops

After 61% of riders told the SFMTA in live surveys       Confident from its earlier survey that most riders
that they would be willing to walk longer distances    supported bus stop balancing in concept, SFMTA
if buses moved faster, the agency released a plan in   staffed ambassadors at stops slated for removal to
2010 to remove 20% of stops on high ridership routes.  keep riders informed about specific changes. This
The bus stop balancing campaign was embedded in        allowed for tailored responses to each rider's specific
the larger Muni Forward initiative, which combines     concern or comment. The approach helped SFMTA
service additions, operational changes, and transit    remove 71 stops on eight routes.
priority street projects to make buses faster and
more reliable.
!  Alert riders who will benefit, not just
   those whose stops will be moved

   Inform all riders along a route, including riders at stops that will be
   preserved. Alerting riders who will benefit from removing stops will
   help build a constituency for change.

       Information about projected travel time changes should be posted
   at all stops along an affected route, as should instructions to submit
   comments to the agency. At stops that will be preserved, include
   information about benches, shelters, or other amenities that will be
   added as part of the bus stop balancing project. At those that will
   be removed, convey where the next closest bus stop is located.

                                             For its redesign of the Austin bus network,
                                             Capital Metro posted notifications at every bus
                                             stop informing riders of upcoming changes.

   17
King County Metro Customized Its Approach

Recently King County Metro began considering bus ambassadors engaged with riders at stops, community

stop removals along a route through neighborhoods centers, and worked with local organizations to

with hilly terrain and a large population whose native inform their members of the expected changes. The

language isn't English. The hills made walking to  agency recognized that a one-size-fits-all approach

stops more difficult, so the agency relaxed its bus stop doesn't work in a city with such diverse population

spacing requirements on those portions of the route. and topography, so the agency staff remain nimble

King County Metro created a tailored community     and open to change by researching each route's

outreach plan that included hiring bilingual       characteristics and then acting appropriately for

ambassadors to get the message to riders. These    successful agency-rider communication.

                                              Publicly commit to a timeline to do the whole
                                              bus network, even if you implement bus stop
                                              balancing route-by-route or district-by-district

                                              If riders see that their bus stop is one of a small number being removed,
                                              they will feel singled out, and resistance will intensify. Commit to
                                              balancing the entire bus network over a specific time period. Not only
                                              will you make a bigger impact, but riders will see that the changes on
                                              their route are part of systemic improvements.

                                              18
           3. Follow Up

                      Tell board members, elected officials, riders,
                      and the press about improvements to travel
                      time and ridership attributable to bus stop
                      balancing

                              Once the new-and-improved bus stop spacing is speeding up trips
                              for riders, share those results. Publicizing improvements in bus
                              performance attributable to bus stop balancing, as well as added
                              amenities at remaining bus stops, will build support for future
                              campaigns among riders and elected officials.

                      Make it a habit: Reevaluate stop spacing on
                      a regular basis
?

                              Creating good bus stop spacing is not just a one-time achievement, it's
                              something that must be maintained over time. Population and jobs are
                              not static. Demographics shift, travel demand changes, and service
                              patterns must keep up. Agencies may add bus stops to a network for
                              good reason, but must take care to prevent cumulative changes from
                              dragging down performance. By committing to evaluate bus stop
                              spacing on a regular schedule -- say every five years -- agencies can
                              keep their bus stops balanced across the whole network for the long run.

RIPTA Shows That Setbacks Can Be Temporary

RIPTA, Rhode Island's statewide transit agency,         better approach to bus stop balancing on a different
removed bus stops along a route without any signage     route, posting alerts at bus stops weeks ahead of time.
or notice to riders, which led to a strong backlash     Since correcting course, RIPTA has made impressive
that caused the agency to reinstate nearly every stop.  progress, reducing the number of bus stops in its
The agency learned from its mistakes. After taking      network from 5,334 in 2010 to 3,546 in 2018, a 34%
a step back and letting the dust settle, RIPTA took a   reduction with little to no pushback from riders.
Bus stop           Conclusion: Give Riders
balancing          Service That's Too Good
will be better     to Pass Up
received if it is
accompanied        To make transit useful and attractive to riders, agencies need to
by upgrades        speed up bus service. Bus stop balancing is an effective way to
like benches,      achieve that outcome, and agencies have found success with a
shelters, and      campaign approach. The foundation of a good bus stop balancing
improved           campaign is a commitment from agency leadership to prioritize the
pedestrian         initiative and support staff during implementation.
access
                       Bus stop balancing always involves tradeoffs. Riders will get to
                   their destinations faster, but some will have to go farther to reach a
                   stop. Transit agencies need to accurately convey how removing bus
                   stops will change travel for all riders affected. Changes must also be
                   clearly communicated to bus operators, who'll be on the front lines
                   helping riders navigate the new stop pattern.

                       While bus stop balancing is a powerful tool to improve
                   performance on its own, the benefits will be more apparent to riders
                   -- and better received by them -- if paired with other upgrades
                   like off-board fare payment, bus lanes, or queue jumps. The trip to
                   and from the bus stop also has to be safe and comfortable. Transit
                   agencies should work with city street departments to create safer
                   pedestrian access to bus stops and add benches and shelters. Done
                   in concert, these improvements will result in transit service that's
                   worth going a small distance farther to access. Riders will appreciate
                   the changes and more people will choose the bus.

                   21
Further Reading

1. Transit Streets Design Guide (2015)
     National Association of City Transportation Officials
     Technical guidance for city and transit agency staff about
     how to improve bus stops after balancing.

2. Better Boarding, Better Fares (2017)
     National Association of City Transportation Officials
     Guidance for transit agencies about how fare collection
     can speed up bus boarding.

3. From Sorry to Superb: Everything You Need to
    Know About Great Bus Stops (2018) TransitCenter
     Survey of best practices for bus stop management, including
     coordination between cities and transit agencies. Action items
     for agencies that want to develop bus stop improvement programs.

4. Who's On Board: How to Win Back America's
    Transit Riders (2019) TransitCenter
    Opinion survey of transit riders and non-riders in six cities
    that reveals the impact of Uber, Lyft, and private car ownership
    on transit ridership, and what improvements riders value.

5. Better On Street Bus Stops, TCRP Synthesis 117 (2015)
     TCRP Report
     A survey of transit agencies about managing bus stops,
     including case studies.

22
