Section 1 (0:00 - 1:34)
Peter Diamandis is introduced as a special guest on the FYI for Your Innovation podcast, along with Charlie Roberts, ARK's chief investment strategist. Diamandis is known for founding organizations like XPRIZE and Singularity University, and for his vision on how innovation will transform our lives.

Summary:
1. "Peter is the founder of XPRIZE, the founder of Singularity University, and the author of four New York Times Best Sellers." (0:40 - 0:49)
2. "Peter is very closely aligned and very close to Ray Kurzweil, who helped him found Singularity University, and therefore is getting glimpses into the future by the day, which continue to astonish us and he's part of making it all happen." (0:54 - 1:08)
3. "I've taken a leaf from his book, and we're doing our small part in Middle Schools with ARK's research, and Peter is the author of four New York Times Best Sellers." (2:26 - 2:40)

Section 2 (1:34 - 3:16)
The conversation shifts to healthcare and longevity, with Diamandis expressing his passion for the subject. He differentiates between healthcare and "sickcare," emphasizing the need for systems and products that keep people healthy rather than reacting after they are sick.

Summary:
1. "I differentiate between healthcare because we don't have healthcare today, we have sickcare, right? Just to be clear, we take care of people after they're sick, which is a complete reversal of the way it should be. We should have healthcare, which is a series of systems and products and services that keep you healthy versus react to you after you're sick." (4:16 - 4:34)
2. "What I am interested in is healthspan extension or longevity, and for me, that journey started decades ago. I was doing a joint MD-PhD program at Harvard Medical School and MIT." (4:39 - 4:53)
3. "I remember seeing a long television show on long-lived sea life that bowhead whales could live 200 years and Greenland sharks could live four or 500 years, and I remember thinking to myself, if they can live that long, why can't we?" (5:10 - 5:23)

Section 3 (3:16 - 4:48)
Diamandis expresses his belief that this is the decade where significant progress will be made in extending the healthy human lifespan. He cites four major reasons for this, including advancements in AI, quantum computing, biotechnology, and the convergence of these technologies.

Summary:
1. "I personally believe that this is the decade, and there are four major reasons I can go into that if you want, but this is the decade where we're going to make a dent in extending the healthy human lifespan." (5:36 - 5:42)
2. "I've just launched a $100 million Healthspan X Prize to try and reverse the ravages of aging by 20 years, but there's a lot happening, and it's really AI and quantum and biotech and all these things converging right." (5:47 - 5:59)
3. "We talk a lot about convergence that is going to give us the ability to understand perhaps why we age, how to slow it, stop it, and perhaps reverse it, and if we can, I would posit it's the biggest financial market on the planet in terms of opportunities out there." (6:06 - 6:14)

Section 4 (4:48 - 6:20)
Diamandis and Wood discuss the potential limits of longevity and the possibility of curing diseases. Diamandis explains that curing specific diseases like cancer or heart disease only extends the average lifespan by a single-digit number of years, and that the body was never designed to live past 30 in evolutionary terms.

Summary:
1. "If you cure cancer or heart disease, it only extends the average lifespan some single-digit number of years. I wish it was more, but it's not." (6:35 - 6:42)
2. "The body was never designed to live past age 30. 100,000 years ago, we would be pregnant by age 12 or 13, by the time we were 26 or 27, we were a grandparent, and before food was abundant, the last thing you want to do was steal food from your grandchildren's mouths and therefore you would die, give your bits back and you pass on the genes." (6:48 - 7:07)
3. "The longest-lived human today on record is 122. I think the longest-lived human in the US today is 114, and so people have this mental barrier that we can't get past that, and if we don't do anything, yeah, we're sort of stuck there." (7:19 - 7:33)

Section 5 (6:20 - 7:52)
Diamandis discusses the technologies he is most excited about for potentially extending human longevity, including genome sequencing, gene editing, cellular medicine, and stem cell treatments. He also highlights the potential for new, undiscovered technologies fueled by AI and quantum computing.

Summary:
1. "We now have the ability to sequence and then edit your genome, so obviously genome sequencing when Craig Venter sequenced his genome in 2001, it was $100 million in nine months, today it's on the order of a couple hundred dollars and seven hours." (8:05 - 8:21)
2. "It's in gene therapies, being able to inject specific genes, additional copies of certain genes that are beneficial, but then there are things like cellular medicine, right, where we can replenish your stem cell supply." (8:55 - 9:07)
3. "The tech I'm excited about is the one we haven't discovered yet. It's what's coming with AI and quantum, and quantum is going to become we are quantum systems, quantum chemistry, quantum compute, quantum technologies that are literally on our doorstep today." (9:27 - 9:38)

Section 6 (7:52 - 9:24)
The discussion turns to the challenges faced by companies in the multiomics and longevity space in the public markets, with Wood noting that it has been the worst-performing sector for ARK's strategies. Diamandis acknowledges the difficulties but expresses optimism about the future potential of these companies.

Summary:
1. "Capital in the public markets has been treated very badly in this space. This awful, I mean, it's astonishing. It's the multiomics space broadly has been our worst-performing space, and we've been, our strategies have performed better than the certainly last year, than the healthcare space." (16:31 - 16:49)
2. "We got the first approvals for gene editing for beta thalassemia and sickle cell disease, both US and, which is amazing. This is like miraculous, miraculous, godlike, right? And those stocks are starting to respond, but if you really map out over a 5 to 10-year period, what is likely to happen to those stocks, you know, there are next Genentech." (18:42 - 19:02)
3. "I think that we're in the most extraordinary biotech buying opportunity on the marketplace right now." (20:31 - 20:37)

Section 7 (9:24 - 10:56)
Diamandis discusses the potential aha moment when the public will fully embrace and understand the significance of the breakthroughs happening in the longevity and multiomics space. He also touches on the $2 million treatment cost for rare diseases and the potential for gene therapies to become more affordable at scale.

Summary:
1. "When do you think we'll see that aha moment? I just to give you a sense of how bad the mood had been, when I think her name was Allison or Ally, the young girl in the UK who was cured of leukemia after six months with gene editing, right? Or Allissa, exactly. Yes, Allissa. You know, it didn't even make any waves this was late 2022." (18:17 - 18:37)
2. "A lot of people are concerned that gene therapies are expensive, and is longevity going to be a rich person's option? Two things worth noting, one is a conversation with George Church, and he said, you know, listen, if you're if you're giving a gene therapy for a rare disease, it can be half a million to $2 million per therapy." (15:09 - 15:29)
3. "And because the number of of clients, number of patients is small, it's a rare disease, but if you look at the RNA vaccines that we had from Pfizer and Moderna, those were gene therapies effectively, and they cost you know single dollars to manufacture per dose because we manufactured them in the hundreds of millions or billions, so gene can be cheap." (15:29 - 15:44)

Section 8 (10:56 - 12:28)
The discussion shifts to robotics and AI, with Diamandis expressing excitement about the convergence of physical and digital technologies. He shares his vision of humans eventually having AI assistants like Jarvis and the potential for neuralink and optimus to converge, allowing humans to control robots through brain-computer interfaces.

Summary:
1. "I am convinced we are all gonna have a version of Jarvis, right? We're gonna have, and Jarvis is my favorite AI model because I believe, in fact, we're going to have and Jarvis will be our interface to the world. Whatever you need done, you speak to Jarvis, it can if you if you're sitting in an F35 jet, 'Jarvis please taxi and take off and fly to 10,000 ft,' it knows how to interface, it's got the ultimate API Library if you would." (33:44 - 34:09)
2. "I love playing convergence on Elon's companies, is Neuralink and Optimus, right? So I want to plug my visual auditory in muscle in my homunculus, my sensory in motor cortex through Neuralink into a robot that's going to be very doable, and I can I can walk down the streets of Tokyo from Santa Monica on the other side of the planet." (34:15 - 34:35)
3. "What about the three-way convergence, Peter, with the Neuralink, Optimus, and the X platform and just having all those trillions of tweets into your brain at the same time?" "Well, you know, listen, you mentioned Ray Kurzweil, who has been a dear mentor and co-founder and partner. We've started a couple companies together, and you know, he made the prediction of AGI, whatever AGI means, by 2029." (34:47 - 35:07)

Section 9 (12:28 - 13:59)
The conversation explores the debate around AI development, with Diamandis discussing the concepts of "boomers" (those advocating for rapid AI development) and "doomers" (those calling for a slowdown). He introduces the idea of "coupled vs. uncoupled" AI, referring to whether AI's future will be closely integrated with humanity through brain-computer interfaces or if it will diverge independently.

Summary:
1. "We brought together Ray Kurzweil and Geoffrey Hinton and Eric Schmidt and Guan Verdon and a whole bunch of folks I'm forgetting, Imad Mustak, and we were debating discussing are you a boomer, we need to go as fast as possible, AI is the single most important thing that that humanity is going to need to solve problems and to solve white hat black hat issues, or are you a doomer, which is like slow down, we don't understand it, we got to slow down." (44:11 - 44:30)
2. "One of the comments made by a gentleman, Alexander Wissner-Gross, was he said, okay, that's one dimension to look at this, which is Boomer versus Doomer, but it's missing a dimension that's very important, which he said is the dimension is coupled versus uncoupled. What does that mean? He said, are we coupling the future of AI with the future of humanity, or is AI going to take off and leave us behind?" (44:36 - 44:58)
3. "Right, so the coupling would occur on the back end of brain-computer interface, Neuralink. There's a whole number of amazing BCI companies. I just had two brain-computer interface companies presenting at the Abundance Summit this year." (45:20 - 45:32)

Section 10 (13:59 - 15:32)
The final section discusses the rise of Bitcoin and its potential as a financial layer for the internet. Diamandis expresses his belief in Bitcoin's transformative power, likening it to the digitization and democratization of financial services. Wood shares insights on ARK's Bitcoin ETF and the significance of Bitcoin as a new asset class.

Summary:
1. "I am a huge Bitcoin proponent. I just had Michael Saylor on stage with me, right? He's one of the largest Bitcoin maximalists and evangelists, and in the most beautiful way, he communicates it, right, as and it's really the financial layer on the internet. It is an equalizing abundance-enabling force on humanity." (54:13 - 54:28)
2. "I talk about the 6Ds of exponential. Whenever you digitize something in the beginning, it's deceptive, then it becomes disruptive, and it dematerializes, demonetizes, and democratizes, and that's Bitcoin to the financial industry." (54:35 - 54:46)
3. "We are number three if you exclude GBTC. So GBTC, its fee is still so high, it has seeded a lot of shares, so we're number three, so David against two Goliaths, and so thrilled to be there, you know, congratulations." (55:05 - 55:11) "No, and we do, you know, we are not going to make any money on this, I guarantee you, and we didn't intend to, but exactly as you say, Peter, this is the financial superhighway, and the most important thing to us is that anyone can gain exposure to it because it is revolutionary. We call it a monetary revolution, financial services revolution, and a new asset class, which is we haven't had a truly new asset class since the 1600s, equities." (55:17 - 55:56)